Release Notes for v2.8 (#4740)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/release-notes/v2.8.md

---
title: "Grafana Mimir version 2.8 release notes"
menuTitle: "V2.8 release notes"
description: "Release notes for Grafana Mimir version 2.8"
weight: 300
---

# Grafana Mimir version 2.8 release notes

Grafana Labs is excited to announce version 2.8 of Grafana Mimir.

The highlights that follow include the top features, enhancements, and bugfixes in this release. For the complete list of changes, see the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).

## Features and enhancements

> - **Changed default value of block storage retention period** The default value for `-blocks-storage.tsdb.retention-period` was `24h` and now is `13h`.

Author: On a second look, you're right. This is just a simple change that we don't need to put here. However, maybe it is better to put in important changes section.

> - **Query-frontend cached results now contain timestamp** This allows Mimir to check if cached results are still valid based on current TTL configured for tenant. Results cached by previous Mimir version are used until they expire from cache, which can take up to 7 days. If you need to use per-tenant TTL sooner, please flush results cache manually.

Reviewer: Is this one of the top four most important features in this release? Seems like an important change that improves correctness, but I wonder if there are more important changes.

Author: I will look again into the changelog. Those three are things that caught my eye. Please suggest if you have some points to place there.

- **Experimental support for using Redis as cache** Mimir now can use Redis for caching results, chunks, index and metadata.
- **Experimental support for fetching secret from Vault for TLS configuration**.

### Helm chart improvements

The Grafana Mimir and Grafana Enterprise Metrics Helm chart is now released independently. See the [Grafana Mimir Helm chart documentation](/docs/helm-charts/mimir-distributed/latest/).

## Important changes

> In Grafana Mimir 2.8 we have removed the following previously deprecated or experimental configuration options or metrics.
> 
> The following metrics have been removed `cortex_bucket_store_series_get_all_duration_seconds`, `cortex_bucket_store_series_merge_duration_seconds`,
> `cortex_ingester_tsdb_wal_replay_duration_seconds`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Grafana Mimir 2.8 we have removed the following previously deprecated or experimental metrics:

- `cortex_bucket_store_series_get_all_duration_seconds`
- `cortex_bucket_store_series_merge_duration_seconds`
- `cortex_ingester_tsdb_wal_replay_duration_seconds`
```

The following configuration options are deprecated and will be removed in Grafana Mimir 2.10:

- The CLI flag `-blocks-storage.tsdb.max-tsdb-opening-concurrency-on-startup` and its respective YAML configuration option `tsdb.max_tsdb_opening_concurrency_on_startup`.

The following experimental options and features are now stable:

> - Use protobuf internal query result payload format by default.

Reviewer: Also, while I'm biased, this might be worthy of being highlighted in the "features and enhancements" section 🙂

Author: Actually it is a good addition :)

## Bug fixes

- Querier: Streaming remote read will now continue to return multiple chunks per frame after the first frame. [PR 4423](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4423)
- Query-frontend: don't retry queries which error inside PromQL. [PR 4643](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4643)
- Store-gateway & query-frontend: report more consistent statistics for fetched index bytes. [PR 4671](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4671)

> - Native histograms: fix how IsFloatHistogram determines if mimirpb.Histogram is a float histogram. [PR 4706](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4706)

Reviewer: This seems very low level, was this user visible in some way?

Reviewer 2: not really, yeah, let's remove.

Author: I will also remove this.

> - Query-frontend: fix query sharding for native histograms. [PR 4666](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4666)

Reviewer: Was query sharding working for native histograms at all in the previous release @krajorama @zenador? I wonder if we should remove this bugfix line and talk about native histograms as an improved experimental feature earlier

Reviewer 3: Previously it wasn't working at all, now it's working a bit but not always (fails in certain cases)

Reviewer 2: @charleskorn is right, we did not have read support for native histograms in 2.7 (see the description [there](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/release-notes/v2.7/#features-and-enhancements))

So let's remove this line and add something about very experimental support for querying native histograms. Add a disclaimer that not all queries may work and semantic might change as they might change in Prometheus as well.

For reference : Prometheus [docs](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/operators/#operators-for-native-histograms)

Author: Any suggestion on the exact wording @krajorama ?

> ... and add something about very experimental support for querying native histograms. Add a disclaimer that not all queries may work and semantic might change as they might change in Prometheus as well.

Reviewer 2: added comment with suggestion

---
title: "Grafana Mimir version 2.8 release notes"
menuTitle: "V2.8 release notes"
description: "Release notes for Grafana Mimir version 2.8"
weight: 300
---

# Grafana Mimir version 2.8 release notes

Grafana Labs is excited to announce version 2.8 of Grafana Mimir.

The highlights that follow include the top features, enhancements, and bugfixes in this release. For the complete list of changes, see the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).

## Features and enhancements

- **Query-frontend and ruler now use protobuf internal query result payload format by default**.
- **Query-frontend cached results now contain timestamp** This allows Mimir to check if cached results are still valid based on current TTL configured for tenant. Results cached by previous Mimir version are used until they expire from cache, which can take up to 7 days. If you need to use per-tenant TTL sooner, please flush results cache manually.
- **Experimental support for using Redis as cache** Mimir now can use Redis for caching results, chunks, index and metadata.

> - **Experimental support for fetching secret from Vault for TLS configuration**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Experimental support for fetching secret from Vault for TLS configuration**.
- **Experimental support for querying native histograms**. This support is not finalized as the related Prometheus API is also experimental, thus the exact behavior might change in future releases.
```

### Helm chart improvements

The Grafana Mimir and Grafana Enterprise Metrics Helm chart is now released independently. See the [Grafana Mimir Helm chart documentation](/docs/helm-charts/mimir-distributed/latest/).

## Important changes

In Grafana Mimir 2.8 we have removed the following previously deprecated or experimental metrics:

- `cortex_bucket_store_series_get_all_duration_seconds`
- `cortex_bucket_store_series_merge_duration_seconds`
- `cortex_ingester_tsdb_wal_replay_duration_seconds`

The following configuration options are deprecated and will be removed in Grafana Mimir 2.10:

- The CLI flag `-blocks-storage.tsdb.max-tsdb-opening-concurrency-on-startup` and its respective YAML configuration option `tsdb.max_tsdb_opening_concurrency_on_startup`.
 

> The following configuration options that was deprecated in 2.6 are removed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following configuration options that were deprecated in 2.6 are removed:
```

- The CLI flag `-store.max-query-length` and its respective YAML configuration option `limits.max_query_length`.

> The following flag that was deprecated in 2.5 are removed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following configuration options that were deprecated in 2.5 are removed:
```

---
title: "Grafana Mimir version 2.8 release notes"
menuTitle: "V2.8 release notes"
description: "Release notes for Grafana Mimir version 2.8"
weight: 300
---

# Grafana Mimir version 2.8 release notes

Grafana Labs is excited to announce version 2.8 of Grafana Mimir.

The highlights that follow include the top features, enhancements, and bugfixes in this release. For the complete list of changes, see the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).

## Features and enhancements

> - **Query-frontend and ruler now use protobuf internal query result payload format by default**.

Reviewer 4: @charleskorn Can you help to add more color to this? What's the benefit?

Reviewer: I'd add something like: "This reduces the CPU and memory utilisation of the querier, query-frontend and ruler, as well as reducing network bandwidth consumed between these components."

- **Query-frontend cached results now contain timestamp** This allows Mimir to check if cached results are still valid based on current TTL configured for tenant. Results cached by previous Mimir version are used until they expire from cache, which can take up to 7 days. If you need to use per-tenant TTL sooner, please flush results cache manually.
- **Experimental support for using Redis as cache** Mimir now can use Redis for caching results, chunks, index and metadata.
- **Experimental support for fetching secret from Vault for TLS configuration**.
- **Experimental support for querying native histograms**. This support is not finalized as the related Prometheus API is also experimental, thus the exact behavior might change in future releases.

> 

Reviewer 4: I suggest to also mention the regexp label matchers optimizations we did. For example:

```
- **Optimized regular expression label matchers**. Reduced CPU utilisation in ingesters and store-gateways when running queries containing regular expression label matchers.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: I think the following is also worth to mention as impactful optimization:

```
* [ENHANCEMENT] Store-gateway: use streaming implementation for LabelNames RPC. The batch size for streaming is controlled by `-blocks-storage.bucket-store.batch-series-size`. #4464
```

## Features and enhancements

- **Query-frontend and ruler now use protobuf internal query result payload format by default** This reduces the CPU and memory utilisation of the querier, query-frontend and ruler, as well as reducing network bandwidth consumed between these components.
- **Query-frontend cached results now contain timestamp** This allows Mimir to check if cached results are still valid based on current TTL configured for tenant. Results cached by previous Mimir version are used until they expire from cache, which can take up to 7 days. If you need to use per-tenant TTL sooner, please flush results cache manually.
- **Optimized regular expression label matchers** This reduces CPU utilisation in ingesters and store-gateways when running queries containing regular expression label matchers.
- **Store-gateway now use streaming for LabelNames RPC** This improves memory utilization in store-gateway when calling LabelNames RPC.
- **Experimental support for using Redis as cache** Mimir now can use Redis for caching results, chunks, index and metadata.
- **Experimental support for fetching secret from Vault for TLS configuration**.

> - **Experimental support for querying native histograms**. This support is not finalized as the related Prometheus API is also experimental, thus the exact behavior might change in future releases.

Reviewer 5: These should be moved to the top; they're experimental, but have the most customer relevance.

## Features and enhancements

> - **Changed default value of block storage retention period** The new default value for `-blocks-storage.tsdb.retention-period` is `13h`.

Author: I will put the previous value.

  - `cortex_bucket_store_series_merge_duration_seconds`
  - `cortex_ingester_tsdb_wal_replay_duration_seconds`

The following configuration options are deprecated and will be removed in Grafana Mimir 2.10:

- The CLI flag `-blocks-storage.tsdb.max-tsdb-opening-concurrency-on-startup` and its respective YAML configuration option `tsdb.max_tsdb_opening_concurrency_on_startup`.

The following experimental options and features are now stable:

- Use protobuf internal query result payload format by default

## Bug fixes

- Querier: Streaming remote read will now continue to return multiple chunks per frame after the first frame. [PR 4423](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4423)
- Store-gateway: the values for stage="processed" for the metrics cortex_bucket_store_series_data_touched and cortex_bucket_store_series_data_size_touched_bytes when using fine-grained chunks caching is now reporting the correct values of chunks held in memory. [PR 4449](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4449)
- Compactor: fixed reporting a compaction error when compactor is correctly shut down while populating blocks. [PR 4580](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4580)

> - OTLP: Do not drop exemplars of the OTLP Monotonic Sum metric. [4063](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4063)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- OTLP: Do not drop exemplars of the OTLP Monotonic Sum metric. [PR 4063](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4063)
```

- Packaging: flag /etc/default/mimir and /etc/sysconfig/mimir as config to prevent overwrite. [PR 4587](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4587)
- Query-frontend: don't retry queries which error inside PromQL. [PR 4643](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4643)
- Store-gateway & query-frontend: report more consistent statistics for fetched index bytes. [PR 4671](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4671)
- Native histograms: fix how IsFloatHistogram determines if mimirpb.Histogram is a float histogram. [PR 4706](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4706)
- Query-frontend: fix query sharding for native histograms. [PR 4666](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4666)
- Ring status page: fixed the owned tokens percentage value displayed. [PR 4730](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4730)

> - Querier: fixed chunkIterator may return values after Seek beyond end of chunk. [PR 4450](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/pull/4450)

Reviewer 6: Are we including all bug fixes here now? I think we should refer people to check the changelog, and only highlight most important bugfixes here.

Author: I will remove small bugfixes just leave out the important bugfixes.
